**Title: TBD **

Yuka Takemon, ^1^ Daniel M. Gatti, ^1^ Susan M. Sheehan, ^1^ Holly S.
Savage, ^1^ Gary A. Churchill, ^1^ Ron Korstanje ^1^

^1^ The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA.

Alport Syndrome (AS) is a hereditary disease affecting 1 in 5,000 births
in the United States^1^. Children and young adults with AS suffer from
hearing loss, vision abnormalities, and most notably kidney
disease^2,3^. AS patients with kidney disease are diagnosed with
glomerulonephritis, and present with symptoms of hematuria and
proteinuria. Inevitably, their kidney functions progressively
deteriorate and lead to End-Stage Renal Failure (ESRF) ^3-5^. It is well
studied that ESRF in AS is caused by genetic mutations in the α3, α4,
and α5 chains of type IV collagen, which are encoded by *COL4A3, COL4A4,
and COL4A5*. In the kidney, the three type IV collagen proteins form
heterotrimers and are exclusively found in the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) ^6,7^. A dysfunction in any one of the type IV collagen
proteins causes the GBM to weaken and distend, and podocytes foot
process effacement to occur^5^. COL4A5 is the only type IV collagen
protein encoded on the X chromosome, and is responsible for 80% of AS
diagnosis. As the X-linkage suggests, males that are hemizygous to the
*COL4A5* mutation are disproportionally affected compared to females.
Males have an earlier onset and increased severity of the disease, with
50% of patients requiring dialysis or kidney transplants due to ESRF by
the age of 25 and 100% by the age of 60^8^. On the other hand females
that are heterozygous for this X-linked AS have relatively later onset
with 12% developing ESRF by the age of 40 and 40% at the age of 80
years^9^. Curiously, patients with similar genetic mutations do not all
present the disease in a similar manner, and studies have observed their
age of onset and severity to be highly variable^8^.

In the 2015 International Workshop on AS, clinicians and researchers
highlighted the need for an effective cure for AS^10^. Currently the
only available treatment options for AS patients are
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors (ACE-inhibitors) or
angitotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), which are primarily used as
treatment for hypertension^2,8^. Treatment with ACE-inhibitors are able
to alleviate the mechanical pressures applied to the fragile GMB of AS
patients and delay onset of ESRF, however treatment efficacy is highly
dependent on timing^10,11^. In addition to the lack of treatment
options, we still do not have a specific target for therapeutic
interventions. Although *Col4a5* is known to cause AS, it is a poor
therapeutic target as patients with this mutation vary dramatically in
disease progression. It is widely accepted that the varying age of onset
and severity of AS is in part due to underlying mechanisms that are able
to modify disease progression^10,12,13^. However, small samples sizes
and other confounding factors preclude the ability to study such
modifier in humans.

To our knowledge there has only been one study conducted to identify
modifier genes in AS models^12^. They observed variations between
*Col4a3* knock out mice in 129X1/SvJ and C57BL/6J backgrounds, and
identified 2 quantitative trail loci (QTL) on chromosome 9 and 16,
however the intervals were not narrow enough to confidently identify
candidate genes^12^. Since 2002, when the prior mentioned study was
conduction, there have been major technological advancements and
recourses to allow for high-resolution mapping. The Diversity Outbred
(DO) mouse population, first published in 2012, is a genetically
heterogeneous model derived from multi-parent crosses consisting of 5
classical inbred models (A/J, C57BL/6J, 129S1/SvImJ, NOD/ShiLtJ, and
NZO/HlLtJ) and 3 wild-derived models (CAST/EiJ, PWK/PhJ, and
WSB/EiJ)^14^. Each individual mouse in a DO population is a genetically
unique combination of the 8 founder strains, and best reflects the
diversity seen in human populations^14,15^. Furthermore, the development
of the third generation of the Mouse Universal Genome Array series,
GigaMUGA, allow for high-resolution mapping at 143,259 SNPs, and the
ability to detect parental origin haplotypes in a DO population^16^.
Utilizing these aforementioned recourses with enough sample size would
be ideal for mapping modifier genes in AS.

In this study we aimed to effectively identify modifier genes in
X-linked AS by introducing the *Col4a5* mutation into a diverse
geneti­­­c background using the DO mouse model. The founder strains that
make up DO mice contribute 90% of known genetic variations found in
laboratory mice, and the captured genetic variations are randomly
distributed across the genome^17,18^. Each F1 mouse with an X-linked AS
mutation influenced by a unique combination of heterogeneous genetic
background will present a range of renal phenotypes representative of
the human AS population. With a sufficient samples size through this
method, we will have the ability for high-resolution mapping, and
identify modifier genes in X-linked AS. The identification of modifier
genes will allow for the design of targeted therapeutics, an
intervention urgently needed in for AS patients around the world.

1\. Hertz JM, Thomassen M, Storey H, Flinter F: Clinical utility gene
card for: Alport syndrome. *European Journal of Human Genetics* 20: 2012

2\. Kruegel J, Rubel D, Gross O: Alport syndrome--insights from basic and
clinical research. *Nat Rev Nephrol* 9: 170–178, 2013

3\. Savige J, Gregory M, Gross O, Kashtan C, Ding J, Flinter F: Expert
guidelines for the management of Alport syndrome and thin basement
membrane nephropathy. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* 24: 364–375, 2013

4\. Kelly YP, Patil A, Wallis L, Murray S, Kant S, Kaballo MA, Casserly
L, Doyle B, Dorman A, O'Kelly P, Conlon PJ: Outcomes of kidney
transplantation in Alport syndrome compared with other forms of renal
disease. *Ren Fail* 1–4, 2016

5\. Cosgrove D, Liu S: Collagen IV diseases: A focus on the glomerular
basement membrane in Alport syndrome. *Matrix Biology* 1–10, 2016

6\. Heidet L, Cai Y, Guicharnaud L, Antignac C, Gubler MC: Glomerular
expression of type IV collagen chains in normal and X-linked Alport
syndrome kidneys. *Am. J. Pathol.* 156: 1901–1910, 2000

7\. Hudson BG, Hudson BG, Tryggvason K, Tryggvason K, Sundaramoorthy M,
Neilson EG: Alport“s syndrome, Goodpasture”s syndrome, and type IV
collagen. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 348: 2543–2556, 2003

8\. Kashtan CE, Ding J, Gregory M, Gross O, Heidet L, Knebelmann B,
Rheault M, Licht C: Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment
of Alport syndrome: a statement of the Alport Syndrome Research
Collaborative. *Pediatr Nephrol* 28: 5–11, 2013

9\. Jais JP, Knebelmann B, Giatras I, De Marchi M, Rizzoni G, Renieri A,
Weber M, Gross O, Netzer K-O, Flinter F, Pirson Y, Dahan K, Wieslander
J, Persson U, Tryggvason K, Martin P, Hertz JM, Schröder C, Sanak M,
Carvalho MF, Saus J, Antignac C, Smeets H, Gubler MC: X-linked Alport
syndrome: natural history and genotype-phenotype correlations in girls
and women belonging to 195 families: a “European Community Alport
Syndrome Concerted Action” study. *Journal of the American Society of
Nephrology* 14: 2603–2610, 2003

10\. Flinter F, Savige J, Savva I, Renieri A, Knebelman B, Ding J, Zhang
Y, Gale DP, Schachter AD, Morton LCG, Huang M, Schifter J, Skelding J,
Friede T, Lennon R: Advances and unmet needs in genetic, basic and
clinical science in Alport syndrome: report from the 2015 International
Workshop on Alport Syndrome. *Nephrol. Dial. Transplant.* gfw095, 2016

11\. Gross O, Licht C, Anders HJ, Hoppe B, Beck B, Tönshoff B, Höcker B,
Wygoda S, Ehrich JHH, Pape L, Konrad M, Rascher W, Dötsch J,
Müller-Wiefel DE, Hoyer P, Study Group Members of the Gesellschaft für
Pädiatrische Nephrologie, Knebelmann B, Pirson Y, Grunfeld J-P, Niaudet
P, Cochat P, Heidet L, Lebbah S, Torra R, Friede T, Lange K, Müller GA,
Weber M: Early angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition in Alport
syndrome delays renal failure and improves life expectancy. *Kidney
International* 81: 494–501, 2012

12\. Andrews KL, Mudd JL, Li C, Miner JH: Quantitative trait loci
influence renal disease progression in a mouse model of Alport syndrome.
*Am. J. Pathol.* 160: 721–730, 2002

13\. Korstanje R, Caputo CR, Doty RA, Cook SA, Bronson RT, Davisson MT,
Miner JH: A mouse Col4a4 mutation causing Alport glomerulosclerosis with
abnormal collagen α3α4α5(IV) trimers. *Kidney International* 85:
1461–1468, 2014

14\. Churchill GA, Gatti DM, Munger SC, Svenson KL: The Diversity Outbred
mouse population. *Mamm Genome* 23: 713–718, 2012

15\. Bogue MA, Churchill GA, Chesler EJ: Collaborative Cross and
Diversity Outbred data resources in the Mouse Phenome Database. *Mamm
Genome* 26: 511–520, 2015

16\. Morgan AP, Fu C-P, Kao C-Y, Welsh CE, Didion JP, Yadgary L, Hyacinth
L, Ferris MT, Bell TA, Miller DR, Giusti-Rodriguez P, Nonneman RJ, Cook
KD, Whitmire JK, Gralinski LE, Keller M, Attie AD, Churchill GA, Petkov
P, Sullivan PF, Brennan JR, McMillan L, Pardo-Manuel de Villena F: The
Mouse Universal Genotyping Array: From Substrains to Subspecies. *G3
(Bethesda)* 6: 263–279, 2015

17\. Roberts A, Pardo-Manuel de Villena F, Wang W, McMillan L, Threadgill
DW: The polymorphism architecture of mouse genetic resources elucidated
using genome-wide resequencing data: implications for QTL discovery and
systems genetics. *Mamm Genome* 18: 473–481, 2007

18\. Threadgill DW, Churchill GA: Ten years of the collaborative cross.
*G3 (Bethesda)* 2: 153–156, 2012
